README.md, before:

# map_osm_converter

Convert OpenStreetMap (`.osm`) extracts into Gazebo-ready static models using the OSM2World 0.4.0 toolchain packaged in Docker. The workflow generates OBJ meshes, wraps them in Gazebo model metadata, fixes normals, and provides a launch-ready world file for Gazebo Harmonic.

## Prerequisites
- Docker and the Docker Compose plugin.
- OSM2World 0.4.0 binaries (downloaded separately, see below).
- An `.osm` map extract to convert (place it under `./data/`).

## Rehydrate the project
1. Download `OSM2World-0.4.0-bin.zip` from the official release:  
   https://github.com/tordanik/OSM2World/releases/download/0.4.0/OSM2World-0.4.0-bin.zip
2. Extract the archive into the project under `./osm2world/` (the folder should contain `OSM2World.jar`, `lib/`, `textures/`, etc.). The directory is git-ignored so you can replace it at any time.

## Build and start the container
```bash
docker compose build
docker compose up -d
```
The image installs OpenJDK 17, OSM2World’s runtime dependencies, Gazebo Harmonic (`gz sim`), and `assimp-utils`. The service stays idle (`tail -f /dev/null`) until you run a conversion or simulation.

## Convert an OSM file to a Gazebo model
```bash
./convert_to_gazebo.sh data/city.osm city_3d
```
- Generates `outputs/city_3d.obj` via OSM2World and recomputes face normals (required by Gazebo physics engines).
- Packages the assets under `models/city_3d/` with `model.config` and `model.sdf` (rotated to Gazebo’s Z-up frame).
- Creates a ready-to-launch world at `worlds/city_3d.world` using Bullet physics.

To make the model discoverable outside the container:
```bash
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH:$(pwd)/models
```

### Fixing geometry normals manually
The conversion script calls the normal fixer automatically. To re-run it against an existing OBJ:
```bash
docker compose exec osm2world bash -lc \
  "python3 /workspace/tools/add_obj_normals.py \
    /workspace/outputs/city_3d.obj \
    /workspace/outputs/city_3d_with_normals.obj && \
   mv /workspace/outputs/city_3d_with_normals.obj /workspace/outputs/city_3d.obj"
```

## Simulate in Gazebo Harmonic (GUI)
1. Allow Docker to use your X11 display:
   ```bash
   xhost +local:docker
   ```
   Ensure `DISPLAY` is set in your shell (e.g., `export DISPLAY=:0`).
2. Launch Gazebo from inside the container (run as `root` so Gazebo finds a valid home directory):
   ```bash
   docker compose up -d osm2world
   docker compose exec \
     -u root \
     -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
     -e XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/osm2world_x11 \
     osm2world \
     bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim /workspace/worlds/city_3d.world'
   ```
   For headless mode append `-r -s` to the `gz sim` command. To load just the model:
   ```bash
   docker compose exec \
     -u root \
     -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
     -e XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/osm2world_x11 \
     osm2world \
     bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim /workspace/models/city_3d/model.sdf'
   ```
3. When finished, revoke display access with `xhost -local:docker`.

## Clean up
```bash
docker compose down
```
This stops and removes the helper container. Bring it back with `docker compose up -d` whenever you need to convert more maps.

## Troubleshooting
- **`❌ OSM2World did not produce ...`** — the conversion failed because the input `.osm` has invalid/self-intersecting polygons. Inspect the warnings in the log (relation IDs) and clean the data (e.g., via JOSM) or clip the map to a simpler region.
- **Gazebo crashes at startup** — make sure you use the `docker compose exec -u root ... bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim ...'` command shown above so the logger can create its working directory.
- **Outputs owned by root** — if you ran the container without the compose file, fix permissions once:  
  `docker compose exec -u root osm2world chown -R $(id -u):$(id -g) /workspace/outputs /workspace/models`

Happy mapping!

Commit message:

Update README and script to include Docker service restart instructions and OSM2World verification

README.md, after:

# map_osm_converter

Convert OpenStreetMap (`.osm`) extracts into Gazebo-ready static models using the OSM2World 0.4.0 toolchain packaged in Docker. The workflow generates OBJ meshes, wraps them in Gazebo model metadata, fixes normals, and provides a launch-ready world file for Gazebo Harmonic.

## Prerequisites
- Docker and the Docker Compose plugin.
- OSM2World 0.4.0 binaries (downloaded separately, see below).
- An `.osm` map extract to convert (place it under `./data/`).

## Rehydrate the project
1. Download `OSM2World-0.4.0-bin.zip` from the official release:  
   https://github.com/tordanik/OSM2World/releases/download/0.4.0/OSM2World-0.4.0-bin.zip
2. Extract the archive into the project under `./osm2world/` (the folder should contain `OSM2World.jar`, `lib/`, `textures/`, etc.). The directory is git-ignored so you can replace it at any time.
3. If the Docker service was already running when you copied the files, restart it so the bind mount sees the new contents:
   ```bash
   docker compose down
   docker compose up -d
   ```

## Build and start the container
```bash
docker compose build
docker compose up -d
```
The image installs OpenJDK 17, OSM2World’s runtime dependencies, Gazebo Harmonic (`gz sim`), and `assimp-utils`. The service stays idle (`tail -f /dev/null`) until you run a conversion or simulation.

## Convert an OSM file to a Gazebo model
```bash
./convert_to_gazebo.sh data/city.osm city_3d
```
- Generates `outputs/city_3d.obj` via OSM2World and recomputes face normals (required by Gazebo physics engines).
- Packages the assets under `models/city_3d/` with `model.config` and `model.sdf` (rotated to Gazebo’s Z-up frame).
- Creates a ready-to-launch world at `worlds/city_3d.world` using Bullet physics.

To make the model discoverable outside the container:
```bash
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH:$(pwd)/models
```

### Fixing geometry normals manually
The conversion script calls the normal fixer automatically. To re-run it against an existing OBJ:
```bash
docker compose exec osm2world bash -lc \
  "python3 /workspace/tools/add_obj_normals.py \
    /workspace/outputs/city_3d.obj \
    /workspace/outputs/city_3d_with_normals.obj && \
   mv /workspace/outputs/city_3d_with_normals.obj /workspace/outputs/city_3d.obj"
```

## Simulate in Gazebo Harmonic (GUI)
1. Allow Docker to use your X11 display:
   ```bash
   xhost +local:docker
   ```
   Ensure `DISPLAY` is set in your shell (e.g., `export DISPLAY=:0`).
2. Launch Gazebo from inside the container (run as `root` so Gazebo finds a valid home directory):
   ```bash
   docker compose up -d osm2world
   docker compose exec \
     -u root \
     -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
     -e XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/osm2world_x11 \
     osm2world \
     bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim /workspace/worlds/city_3d.world'
   ```
   For headless mode append `-r -s` to the `gz sim` command. To load just the model:
   ```bash
   docker compose exec \
     -u root \
     -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY \
     -e XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/tmp/osm2world_x11 \
     osm2world \
     bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim /workspace/models/city_3d/model.sdf'
   ```
3. When finished, revoke display access with `xhost -local:docker`.

## Clean up
```bash
docker compose down
```
This stops and removes the helper container. Bring it back with `docker compose up -d` whenever you need to convert more maps.

## Troubleshooting
- **`❌ OSM2World did not produce ...`** — the conversion failed because the input `.osm` has invalid/self-intersecting polygons. Inspect the warnings in the log (relation IDs) and clean the data (e.g., via JOSM) or clip the map to a simpler region.
- **Gazebo crashes at startup** — make sure you use the `docker compose exec -u root ... bash -lc 'mkdir -p ~/.gz && gz sim ...'` command shown above so the logger can create its working directory.
- **Outputs owned by root** — if you ran the container without the compose file, fix permissions once:  
  `docker compose exec -u root osm2world chown -R $(id -u):$(id -g) /workspace/outputs /workspace/models`

Happy mapping!
